sui-core: add address balances design docs (#26532)
MystenLabs/sui: crates/sui-core/src/accumulators/design_docs/object_funds_checking.md

# Object Funds Checking (Post-Execution)

This document covers the **post-execution** sufficiency check for object-owned virtual balance
withdrawals — the work done by `ObjectFundsChecker` (in

> `crates/sui-core/src/accumulators/object_funds_checker/`) after the Move VM finishes a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`crates/sui-core/src/accumulators/object_funds_checker/`) after PTB executioon finishes a
```

transaction that withdrew from object-owned accumulator accounts.

For the on-chain data layout, see [`data_model.md`](./data_model.md). For how withdrawals are
declared, executed, and settled, see [`write_path.md`](./write_path.md). For the
**pre-execution** check used for address-owned accumulator accounts, see
[`address_funds_scheduling.md`](./address_funds_scheduling.md). The two checks share machinery
and concepts but are distinct subsystems with different correctness arguments.

## 1. Why post-execution?

Address funds withdrawals have a key advantage: the maximum withdrawal amount is declared in

> the transaction data, so it can be checked before the Move VM runs. Object funds withdrawals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the transaction data, so it can be checked before the transaction is run. Object funds withdrawals
```

have no such advantage. An object-owned accumulator account is controlled by a Move program,
and the withdrawal amount is computed at runtime. There is no way to know how much will be
withdrawn until execution finishes.

This means the system must **execute first, then check**. If the check fails, the transaction
must be re-executed in a way that produces a deterministic failure.

```
  ┌───────────────┐     ┌───────────────────┐     ┌────────────────────┐
  │ Execute       │     │ ObjectFundsChecker │     │ Commit Effects     │

>   │ Move VM       │ ──> │ (post-execution    │ ──> │                    │

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  │ adapter       │ ──> │ (post-execution    │ ──> │                    │
```
🤷

  │               │     │  sufficiency check)│     │                    │
  └───────────────┘     └────────┬──────────┘     └────────────────────┘
                                 │
                    ┌────────────┼────────────┐
                    │            │            │
               Sufficient   Pending       Pending
               (commit      (version      (version settled,
                effects)     unsettled,    insufficient →
                             wait then     re-execute with
                             re-execute)   Insufficient flag)
```

### Computing the withdrawal amount: the running max

> After the Move VM finishes executing a transaction, the system examines all accumulator events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the adapter finishes executing a transaction, the system examines all accumulator events
```

    │   WAIT: spawn watcher task
    │   (blocks until version settles,
    │    then re-enqueue transaction
    │    with MaybeSufficient status)
    │
    ▼
  Read balance at version.
  Subtract unsettled withdrawals (see §2.1).
  Is the effective balance ≥ running max withdrawal?
       │
    ┌──┴──┐
   YES    NO
    │      │
    │      ▼
    │   FAIL: re-enqueue with Insufficient flag
    │   (next execution will produce early error)
    │
    ▼
  SUCCESS: record this withdrawal as unsettled,
  commit effects normally
```

When the version is **not yet settled**, the checker cannot know the final balance — a
deposit in the same or earlier commit might change it. So it spawns a background task that
watches the `watch` channel for the settled version to advance. When settlement arrives, the
task re-enqueues the transaction for re-execution. On the second pass, the version will be
settled and the checker can make a definitive decision.

When the version **is settled** but the balance is insufficient, the checker immediately sends
an `Insufficient` status. The transaction is re-enqueued with
`FundsWithdrawStatus::Insufficient` set in its `ExecutionEnv`, so the next execution

> short-circuits with an `InsufficientFundsForWithdraw` error without running the Move VM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
short-circuits with an `InsufficientFundsForWithdraw` error without executing the transaction.
```

- Checker reads balance: 1000 (unchanged in storage — no settlement yet).
- Unsettled at (X, v5): 300.
- Effective balance: 1000 − 300 = 700 ≥ 400 → **sufficient**.
- Update unsettled: (X, v5) = 700.
- Effects committed.

**TX3 executes**: running max for X is 400.

- Checker reads balance: 1000.
- Unsettled at (X, v5): 700.
- Effective balance: 1000 − 700 = 300 < 400 → **insufficient**.
- TX3 is re-enqueued with `Insufficient` flag. Its next execution will fail with an early
  error.

```
  Storage balance: 1000 (constant — hasn't settled yet)

  TX1: needs 300   effective = 1000 - 0   = 1000 ≥ 300 ✓   unsettled → 300
  TX2: needs 400   effective = 1000 - 300 =  700 ≥ 400 ✓   unsettled → 700
  TX3: needs 400   effective = 1000 - 700 =  300 < 400 ✗   → Insufficient
```

Without the unsettled tracking, all three would see the full 1000 balance and all would be
approved, allowing 1100 to be withdrawn from an account with only 1000.

### 3.2 Pending check with re-execution

**Setup**: Object account Y has balance 500 at version 5. Last settled version is 5.

**Consensus Commit at version 6** contains TX1, which reads accumulator version 6.

> **TX1's first execution**: the Move VM runs and produces a running max withdrawal of 200 from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**TX1's first execution**: the transaction is executed and produces a running max withdrawal of 200 from
```

Y.

- Checker sees accumulator version 6. Last settled version is 5.
- Version 6 > settled version 5 → **unsettled**, cannot check yet.
- Checker spawns a background watcher task and returns `Pending`.
- `should_commit_object_funds_withdraws()` returns `false`.
- Execution pipeline returns `RetryLater` — effects are **not** committed.

**Settlement v5→v6** arrives. The watcher task is notified (via the watch channel). It sends
`MaybeSufficient` through its oneshot channel. The background task re-enqueues TX1 for
execution.

> **TX1's second execution**: the Move VM runs again (same code, same inputs) and again produces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**TX1's second execution**: the transaction is executed again (same code, same inputs) and again produces
```

a running max withdrawal of 200 from Y.

- Checker sees accumulator version 6. Last settled version is now 6.
- Version 6 ≤ settled version 6 → can check.
- Storage balance at version 6: let's say 600 (after settlement applied deposits). Unsettled
  at (Y, v6): 0.
- Effective balance: 600 − 0 = 600 ≥ 200 → **sufficient**.
- Update unsettled: (Y, v6) = 200.
- Effects committed.

If the balance after settlement had been only 100, the checker would have immediately sent
`Insufficient`. TX1 would be re-enqueued with the insufficient flag, and its third execution

> would produce an `InsufficientFundsForWithdraw` early error without running the Move VM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
would produce an `InsufficientFundsForWithdraw` early error without executing the transaction.
```

This is part of the production invariant for the checker: by the time object-funds checking
runs, the transaction has a concrete assigned accumulator version. Maintain changes to this
area with that requirement in mind; without a specific assigned version, the checker would have
no well-defined historical balance to validate against.

## 6. Epoch boundaries

The `ObjectFundsChecker` is replaced at epoch boundaries the same way the address-funds
scheduler is — see [`address_funds_scheduling.md`](./address_funds_scheduling.md) §7. The
`watch` channel sender on the old checker is dropped, ending any in-flight watcher tasks
(their `within_alive_epoch` guard breaks them out of waiting cleanly). Pending object funds
checks from the old epoch are effectively abandoned and will be handled by the checkpoint
executor during epoch transition.

## 7. Key differences from address funds scheduling

While both systems validate withdrawals against accumulator balances, they differ in
fundamental ways:

**When the amount is known.** Address fund withdrawal maximums are declared in the
transaction data and known before execution. Object fund withdrawal amounts are computed by

> the Move VM during execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
during execution.
```

**When the check happens.** Address funds are checked *before* execution (pre-execution gate).
Object funds are checked *after* execution (post-execution validation).

**How insufficient funds are handled.** For address funds, the eager scheduler can
immediately fail the transaction — the Move VM never runs. For object funds, the Move VM has

> already run; the checker must re-enqueue the transaction for a second execution with an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
immediately fail the transaction. For object funds, the PTB has
already been run; the checker must re-enqueue the transaction for a second execution with an
```
